Good morning.
Welcome to session 503:
Optimizing for Power Mac G5.
It's been about a year since
we introduced – actually,
exactly a year since we
introduced the Power Mac G5 chip.
And last year, if you're here at WWDC,
most of the content that we
presented dealt a lot with the
architecture of the G5 chip itself.
We had optimization labs running
several days into the night,
so late night at times,
trying to get as much information
to you as a developer to understand
the differences between the G4
chip architecture and the G5.
There are very stark differences there.
This year, we want to, again,
reemphasize the architectural
differences and why it matters
to writing optimized code.
But we also want to now make sure that
you guys understand how to utilize the
tools that we supply in our toolset,
as well as the compiler options
that you have in terms of helping
you optimize your code itself.
So we have several speakers this morning.
From the compiler team
to our performance group,
as well as a guest speaker
from IBM this morning.
So with that,
I'd like to start off this morning,
introduce Sanjay Patel
from our performance group.
Good morning.
It's a tough time slot.
For those of you who were here last year,
we're going to do a bit of review.
How many of you were here
last year for this talk?
Okay, so we're going to go through some
G5 architecture and then we want
to talk about things you can do to
help improve your code on G5 and,
in fact, all platforms, really.
And then we'll turn it over
to some of our compiler guys
to help guide you through your
process of optimizing your code.
So to start off with,
when you're talking about the G5,
you have to of course start
with the PowerPC 970 chip.
And this is of course a super pipeline,
super scalar processor we got from
– we teamed up with IBM to make.
It's based on the Power 4
server architecture.
The big addition that we had to
make it an Apple chip was to add
what we call the AlteVec engine,
also known as the Velocity Engine.
This is a 128-bit vector unit,
which does floating-point
and integer math.
And the other big difference
is we have this high-bandwidth,
point-to-point interface that connects
the chips to the memory controller.
And to help take advantage of all the
bandwidth that we have available in the
system in theory are these automatic
hardware prefetch engines that help put
all that theoretical bandwidth to use.
So this is a die shot of the 970
chip to – for hardware engineers,
this is kind of like pornography.
You know, you look at this and you'll
hear them say things like,
"Look at the FPUs on that
one." For software engineers,
what you want to take away from
this is that there are lots of
execution units available for your
program that all operate in parallel.
So two independent load store units,
two independent IEEE-compliant
floating point units.
You have the full
implementation of AltaVec,
two fixed point units as well.
So there's just a lot of space here
to get things done in parallel.
Another way to look at this
from the software perspective,
again, is if you start at the top,
you have the L1 cache,
which holds your instructions.
From the L1 cache,
instructions flow into a fetch queue,
and from there they get dispatched,
up to five instructions on each clock.
So at 2.5 GHz,
you're dispatching over 10 – in theory,
10 billion instructions per second.
Now that's actually the narrow
point of the 970 architecture.
So as you can see,
this stuff in the kind of greenish-gray
is out-of-order execution.
So you can feed 12 independent
execution units with 10 issue
queues once you've dispatched.
And then again,
your instructions complete at the
bottom of this picture in order,
up to 5 per clock.
Now,
a good way to put this in perspective is
to look at how the G5 compares to the G4.
And so, we keep talking about the
parallelism of this chip.
One way to measure that is
how many instructions you
keep in flight simultaneously.
And for the G5,
it's over 200 instructions in
flight compared to a little
over 30 for a G4 architecture.
And we've also increased
the pipeline stages,
so you can see that it's more than
doubled for a simple integer instruction.
And usually you'd say, "Well,
that's not so good.
Why'd you do that?" The reason
we increase the pipeline stages
is to help increase frequency,
so we just announced that we hit 2.5 GHz.
In order to hit higher and
higher frequency numbers,
you increase the pipeline depths.
We talk about some of the
execution units again.
We've doubled up on the load store units,
doubled up on floating point units.
You now have two fixed point – two
general purpose fixed point units,
whereas on a G4 architecture you
have up to three simple units that
do things like adds and subtracts,
and one complex unit to handle
things like multiplies and divides.
The vector units are pretty similar.
You have an ALU that handles
floating point and integer,
and you have a permute unit.
For any of you who have done any
vector programming with AltaVec,
you know what the power of the permute
unit is in terms of swizzling data
out of memory and into the registers.
As we work our way out from the core,
the biggest program or visible
difference that you'll find is that
the cache line size is different.
It's under 28 bytes,
whereas it was 32 for a G4.
Now, that can either be a really
good thing or a bad thing,
and I'll show an example
of how that happens.
As we work our way again to memory,
you have the L1 cache is the same size,
different associativity and write policy.
The L2 cache – sorry,
the L1 instruction cache
is also doubled up in size.
There's the L2 cache.
The L2 cache is also doubled
in size compared to 7450.
You'll notice there's no
L3 cache on a G5 system,
whereas you had up to 2
megabytes of L3 on a G4 system.
Now,
we've made up for that by increasing the
processor bandwidth substantially – one,
by doubling the width
of the DDR interface and
increasing its frequency,
but also the front-side bus.
And this slide is actually
a little out of date.
At 2.5 GHz,
we've increased the front-side
bus frequency to 1.25 GHz,
so you can actually, in theory,
get 5 gigabytes per
second in each direction.
So I want to talk about some programmer
problems I've seen over the last
year since we've introed the machine.
And the one that comes up most frequently
turns out to be a rather simple thing.
It's conversions from
floating point to integers.
And the reason this shows up a lot
is because when you write this in C,
it looks really cheap, right?
You just cast your variable
into int or cast it to float.
But it turns out this
is not cheap at all.
Particularly on a G5,
because it has so much
going on in parallel,
when it hits this condition,
because the PowerPC architecture
doesn't have integer register transfers,
you actually have to go to
the L1 cache and come back.
So you have a load and
store operation going on.
There are a lot of things you
can do to avoid the problem,
and the biggest one that I've found
that actually turns out to be one of the
easier solutions is simply don't do that.
It turns out, again,
because it looks so cheap and easy,
that a lot of people just cast from one
to the other without thinking about it.
And when you examine that code,
you realize you could have stayed in one
domain or the other without hampering
or affecting the algorithm in any way.
The other cool way you can
get around the problem,
and of course if you use this, Altevec,
you're going to get a much
greater speedup because of all the
parallelism in the Altevec unit.
But the Altevec unit handles
floating point and integer
identically in the same register set,
so there's no memory operations
when you transfer between types.
Another potential optimization is
to use the gcc compiler flag – fast.
This tries to schedule your loads
and stores and inserts no-ops
even to separate them out to keep
things flowing through the G5.
IBM's Excel compilers also do
this kind of optimization if
you specify the G5 architecture.
So I want to show you a quick and
really simple example of bad code.
So this is a real lame loop.
All it does is int to float conversion
because the loop counter in this case,
i, has been declared an int,
but we're adding it into
a floating point sum.
So that looks really cheap, but it's not.
Every time you do that add,
you're going to have to convert the
i from integer to floating point
domain to store it into the sum.
So how would you get around this problem?
What you can do is create what
I call a shadow of the i variable
in the floating point unit.
So I've just named it i_fp to denote
that it's floating point value.
And when I initialize i,
I also initialize its shadow.
And when I increment i,
I increment its shadow.
Now inside the loop,
we're going to use the floating
point value for the sum
rather than the integer value.
So on a G5, I measured this.
It turns out this code is three
times faster than the previous code
where you're doing the conversions
because this code won't have to do
all the load and store operations.
And the next biggest thing I've seen
over the last year is just improvements
to try to schedule your code.
And like I say,
the G5 has a lot of execution units
that you can operate in parallel,
but if you write dependent code – so
one operation depends on the next,
depends on the next,
it's all serial – you're not going
to take advantage of all those units,
and furthermore, you're not going to take
advantage of these long pipelines.
You have to schedule your code
so that you're filling in all
these pipeline slots instead of
causing bubbles in execution.
So, compiler help is here.
You have gcc 3.3,
which has G5 architecture tuning,
so that tries to schedule for
the available units and slots.
XLC also has the same kind of
flag where you specify that
you have a G5 architecture.
And the other thing you
can do is use Shark,
which you've probably heard about,
and we'll talk about it in
more detail tomorrow at 3:30.
We have a full session on how to use
Shark and what it can do for you.
Now again, I mentioned that we've
increased the pipeline stages
compared to a G4 on the G5.
So what does that mean?
Well, it means it takes longer in
terms of clocks for a simple
instruction to complete.
So, for example, an addition instruction
may take one cycle on a G4,
but it may take two
cycles of latency on a G5.
So what you want to do is account
for that in your program by
kind of grouping a bunch of
the similar operations together.
So that means you can unroll
your important loops or you
can use a compiler flag.
And as well, you want to schedule
your code for the G5,
so you're going to fill in
all those pipeline slots.
Now, people often ask, "Well,
shouldn't the compiler do that for
me?" And in all these examples,
you can always ask that question,
"Shouldn't the compiler do
that for me?" In some cases,
the compiler can do it for you
if you specify the right flags.
But there's always a downside if
you just lean on the automatic
way to work over this problem,
because the compiler hardly
usually doesn't know when
a loop is important or not.
That's something you have to tell it.
So if you choose to unroll all
loops or unroll most loops,
you're going to have a
big increase in code size,
which could be detrimental
to your performance.
That's why as a first pass,
you should profile your program.
And try to do manually some
of these optimizations just
in the important spots.
So here's another example
of some code that's,
again, just a silly example.
We're just going to sum a
bunch of ones in this case.
The 970 architecture of the G5
has two floating-point units,
and they're each six stages long.
So this code is only going to
get approximately one-twelfth
efficiency because every instruction
is dependent on the previous sum.
So this is a simple example.
Now, the code has exploded, right?
Because we're trying to fill
all the pipeline stages,
and here we actually only unrolled
to eight ways of partial sums,
so we wouldn't fill all
of 12 pipeline slots.
You would actually want to do 12 in
order to maximize your gains on the G5.
So you can think of the floating-point
units as either one 12-stage
pipeline or 12 single units.
But they're all going
to operate in parallel.
So this code turns out to be 10
times faster just using partial
sums instead of one variable.
The other big thing you have to worry
about when you're optimizing code –
and this goes for all architectures,
but it's particularly bad on a G5
because the G5 core is so good.
It makes memory look really, really slow.
What you have to do is try
to reduce operations where
you're waiting on memory.
So effectively reduce your latency.
There are a couple of ways to do that.
One is to rely on
hardware prefetch engines.
And I'll show you
another example of that.
The other thing you can do is use
software prefetch instructions to
get the data before you actually
need to use it for computations.
For example, if you're in a loop,
you can batch all your loads
together at the top of the loop,
do a bunch of math,
and then do stores at the bottom.
That's going to perform better than
doing serial operations of load,
math, store.
I mentioned that the data cache is
different on the G5 than the G4,
and the biggest difference
is the cache line size.
So it's four times as big.
What does that mean?
Well,
it means you may get one-fourth the cache
misses if your data is organized nicely.
It may also mean that you're
getting really terrible performance
if you're accessing one byte,
skipping 127 and accessing
another one byte.
At that point,
you're getting less than 1%
efficiency from your cache.
So what you want to do – and
this is sort of basic CS,
right?
Pack your data together
to maximize its locality.
So as you walk through your array,
you want to be stepping sequentially
rather than jumping around.
This has an additional benefit
of triggering the hardware
memory – the hardware prefetcher.
So the CPU is automatically going to
detect that you're walking a straight
line either up or down through
memory and start prefetching cache
lines from memory into the cache.
So again, here's another simple example.
This is a classic two-dimensional
array where we're walking
the wrong way through it.
We're iterating on the
columns – or rather,
the rows – rather than the columns.
So we're skipping large chunks of memory.
In this case,
what you'd want to do is just switch the
four loops so that you could sequentially
access every element in this array.
So any guesses on how much
faster this is going to be?
It's a big difference.
This is simple stuff,
but 30 times faster if you do the right
thing rather than the wrong thing.
It highlights the problem of how
important accessing memory is.
So I just want to summarize some of the
things you should be doing and looking
at while you're trying to optimize code.
The first thing to do is try to
unroll and schedule important loops.
Because you have all these
execution units – the
independent floating-point units,
the independent load-store units.
You have hundreds of
instructions in flight.
This number is actually
out of date as well.
You can now use Altevec to
calculate more than 36 gigaflops
per second at 2.5 gigahertz.
This is of course the best
solution if you have code
that's just massively parallel.
You can operate on all the
elements simultaneously.
For those of you writing
floating-point code,
the G5 has a hardware
square-root instruction,
which can be enabled with gcc
with this PowerPC GP opt flag.
XLC will recognize that this
instruction is available if you
specify the G5 architecture.
This has made a very large difference
in some ray-tracers and renderers and
other programs that I've looked at that
have heavy dependence on square-root.
If you're using 64-bit integers,
long-longs in C,
you can turn on flags to specify
that you have a 64-bit machine,
because G5 truly does have
64-bit integer registers.
This can be a huge difference
for code compared to actually
breaking up into 32-bit chunks.
So again, the system and the chip were
designed for high bandwidth.
They were designed to do
lots of things in parallel.
It's part of the server heritage
coming from the Power 4.
You have 40 gigabytes per
second to the L1 cache,
up to 80 gigabytes per
second between the caches,
and up to 5 gigabytes per
second to and from main memory.
And the way you want to take advantage
of all this theoretical throughput
and put it into practice is to take
advantage of hardware prefetch engines.
So these will start scooping data
out of main memory and bringing to
cache before you actually need it.
And that's all I have.
So with that,
I'd like to introduce Steve Hikiida
from the IBM compiler team.
Good morning, all.
Good morning.
I'm actually very excited to be here as
we have now introduced our Excel CC++ and
Fortran compilers for the Mac OS X – or,
Mac OS X, my apologies.
So IBM compiler technology.
We've been in the business of compilation
technologies for over 15 years and
exploiting primarily PowerPC technology,
but we've also been on
about nine other platforms,
mainly IBM platforms.
In among all this technology,
we've got numerous types of
optimization patents that truly
exploit the PowerPC technology.
Our goal in the IBM compiler
team is actually threefold.
The first one is to exploit the hardware.
Our actual key here is to drive
out the maximum performance we can
possibly get out of the G5 processor.
Among these things, we have an extensive
portfolio of optimizations.
These include things like
intra-procedural analysis,
which does whole-loop program analysis.
It has the profile-directed feedback.
Loop optimizations for parallelism,
instructions,
and all for locality scheduling.
One of the things that we do regularly
is we actually work very closely
with the chip architecture team,
where we've been working with the core
team that actually develops the chips
and provide them with information as
to what ways that they may want to
change the actual chip versus also
the type of information that we can
exploit within our own compilers.
The second thing that our compiler
group really is focused on is
specifications and standards.
For our C and C++,
we are C/1999 and C++/1998 compliant.
For 4-Trend, we're 4-Trend 70, 90,
95 and partial 2003.
We also have OpenMP support.
Primarily that was introduced on
the AX platforms and we are bringing
it over to the Mac OS X also.
Our developers within our CEC++ and
FORTRAN teams are also representative
on the standards committees.
They're not only on the
ISO standards committee,
but they're also on
the OpenMP consortium.
So being really focused on compatibility
and also on standard specification,
our compilers is also source
codes that can be pumped through
our compilers are easily portable
between numerous platforms.
For example, Mac OS X, Linux, AX,
and our mainframes at OS.
The third thing that we're really
focused on is the customer care.
We work very closely with various ISVs
and also customers on tuning their code.
As a matter of fact,
we're down in the optimization lab all
this week and some of our engineers
have been working very closely with
people that have brought in their code
and we've actually seen markups from
anywhere between 20% and 200% even
in a short period of time by using
our compilers to exploit their code.
So, for the CC++ and the Fortran
compilers on Mac OS X,
they are based on our
AIX and Linux compilers.
On AIX and Linux,
we call it right now VisualHC++.
So,
the VisualHC++ for those platforms are
essentially the same compilers that
we have for the Mac OS X platform.
So, this actually leverages all the
proven optimizations and language
specifications that we've already
introduced on those platforms.
Some of the common things between our
XLC and C++ compilers and Fortran is,
as I mentioned already,
the exploitation of the G5 architecture.
We are integrated with Xcode.
Symbolic to Bangalore GDB.
And also we support a number
of the Apple's profiling tools.
The Shark one in particular
is just an outstanding tool
in helping tune your code.
For sure, even ourselves,
we wish that it was available
on some of IBM's platforms.
Among the two other things
that we have is part of what
we call a technology preview.
So these are features that we
are actually looking at trying
to bring into our product.
Although they're there right now,
they're not formally supported.
And in particular is the OpenMP.
So our direction is to have
full support for OpenMP 2.0.
And the other one is
automatic parallelization.
Specifically then for C/C++,
as I mentioned, there's the standards
compliance for C99 and C++98,
exploitation of AlteVec.
Although this compiler right
now can actually generate codes
to the AlteVec instructions,
one of the things that we are ongoing
looking at in our research and
development is the automatic syndication,
or otherwise known as automatic
generation of AlteVec instructions.
So these are things that we
are definitely focused on and
looking at in future releases.
Compatibility with GCC 3.3.
This is two-fold.
One is we are fully binary compatible,
so you can intermix
GCC objects with our compiler.
And the other one is that
we have a number of language
extensions that are GCC-specific,
so you can have source
code compatibility.
For C++, we also have an
Objective-C technology preview.
And then for XL4TRN, as I mentioned,
we already have the 4TRN 70, 90,
95 and 2003 partial.
We also introduced many IBM and common
industry standards language extensions.
And these include some from VM,
from ZOS and other well-known
platforms for 4TRN.
So that concludes actually just
a quick overview of the Excel,
C/C++, and Fortran compilers.
If you have any questions
on how to exploit your code,
how to gain even more
optimization capabilities and
performance out of your G5,
come on down to the optimization lab
where there's a number of us IBMers there
to help answer any of your questions.
Thanks a lot.
And the next person up is Ron Price.
Thank you, Steve.
Well,
this has been a terrific year for the G5,
and I think we all now understand
what kind of power lurks in that box.
But those of us who have really
worked a lot with it understand
what it takes to extract that power.
And Sanjay covered some of that,
and of course,
Apple offers a set of tools that really
facilitates understanding your program
and being able to algorithmically
allow it to extract that power.
I want to talk today about
what the compiler can do to
get you started on that path,
because not everyone is ready to step
up and start tuning their program and
changing the algorithms and so forth.
And so Sanjay mentioned a number
of compiler options that can
help you in certain situations.
And what we have done within the
compiler group is actually put
together a mode we call Dash Fast,
and I want to talk about that today.
I also want to talk about
feedback-directed optimizations,
which is another component
of the Dash Fast mode that
can help you significantly.
And then, of course,
you have all heard the announcement
this week that we're on the
path to deliver with Tagger our
initial cut at auto vectorization,
and I want to talk about
exactly what that is.
So GCC and the Dash Fast Mode.
Could I just ask in here if
anyone's using this mode today?
Ah, geez, amazing.
We've had so little feedback on how
it has been working for people that
we've wondered if anyone's using it,
and that's why we wanted
to talk about it today.
The Dash Fast Mode is really a collection
of a lot of the compiler options,
but in many ways it's more than
just a collection of options.
We put them together in a
homogeneous type of fashion to
our best ability to target what
I would call typical applications.
And of course,
we all know there's nothing
like a typical application,
but in this case I mean applications
that are computationally intended.
So if you do a lot of
mathematical computation,
we've tried to target a mode that
will give you a first step into
getting some of the performance.
However, the details of when you
use that mode is important,
so you can't totally say I don't
understand my program and
what's going on in my program.
And so I'll talk a little bit
about the details that are
important and give you a good feel,
at least for Dash Fast and what it is.
And then finally, there is a variant of
Dash Fast called Dash Fast F,
and that's really what you should
be using if you're working with C++.
There are some things that we
do slightly different to try and
address performance in the C++ world.
So what are some of the
specifics about Dash Fast Mode?
What are we trying to actually attack?
Well, Sanjay talked about and others
have talked about the deeply
pipeline nature of the Dash Fast.
So what are some of the
specifics about Dash Fast Mode?
What are we trying to actually attack?
architecture and the
wide functional units.
And so one of the things that
you have to really be concerned
about to get performance is
keeping the pipeline filled,
as we call it.
And so there are a
number of optimizations,
some that Sanjay mentioned,
that we have brought together to
try and keep this pipeline filled.
So we're feeding this monster at
the speed it would like to be fed.
I want to talk a little bit about
standard conformance and some of
the things that we do to relax
the rules so that the compiler
can actually do a better job for
you in terms of optimization.
And then finally, of course,
the G5 instruction set.
This is a presentation on the G5.
So, to start off with,
I don't know how many of
you have ventured into the
-03 level optimization mode,
but I want you to know that's just
the starting point for DashFast.
And so, you'll get that with DashFast.
And along with that come a
couple important options.
One is inlining functions.
And basically,
and you may understand this,
but basically that says
within a computational unit,
the compiler can do some heuristics
to determine how to inline functions
within that computational unit.
And the real purpose behind the compiler
doing that is that the more code that the
compiler can also have an inline view of,
the better all of the
optimizations can be performed.
And so,
the bigger view that the optimizer has,
the better the optimization.
The second is rename registers option.
And what this simply does is it
gives the compiler more freedom in
terms of its register allocation.
And it does that at the expense of
you being able to debug your code,
but if you're on this ragged edge of
trying to get optimum performance,
that is one of the pitfalls
you have to deal with.
The second capability that I want to talk
about is intermodule inlining or function
inlining across the entire system.
And that's the whole program.
And what that does, where the inlining,
the previous inlining option
looked at one computational unit,
the intermodule function inlining
looks at the whole program.
And so it gives you that many
more opportunities to consider
inlining throughout your program.
And once again,
there are heuristics that we have
determined are the best when you're
making guesses about inlining.
And you really don't know.
Whether a function is
called a lot or not.
I'll be mentioning another
feature a little later on,
though, that deals with that.
This is a command line then that
would represent you implementing
intermodule function inlining.
And basically that's triggered by
putting all of your compilation
units on the same compile line so the
compiler can look at them all at once.
The next – and Sanjay talked about
this – has to do with loop unrolling.
And the compiler can actually
do that loop unrolling for you.
Once again, a very simple-minded loop,
but it will serve as
a representation here.
The compiler can actually
deal with more complex loops.
But inlining simply means that it
reduces the number of iterations
of the loop and it puts various
iterations actually in line.
And so once again,
what you're doing is cutting down
on the branching operations and
trying to give the scheduler more
opportunities for scheduling the other
operations in the functional unit.
There is another form of loop
unrolling that the compiler
does called loop peeling.
And in that situation,
you can see here we have
an even smaller loop,
and these do occur in code.
And the compiler will simply
unroll the entire loop and
eliminate the loop altogether.
The next option is loop transposition,
and we have several loop transpositions.
This is similar to what
Sanjay was talking about,
and I think he indicated you
could turn on this option.
But basically,
we have a double-nested loop here,
and it is stepping through memory in
fairly large increments – in this case,
1335.
And that has a terrible effect
on the paging within the machine,
and so for data locality reasons,
we include this loop transpose function.
And what it will do is the
compiler is able to recognize
that situation and actually do
the transposition of the loop,
so that now we're incrementing in
increments of one throughout the memory.
We have a specialized optimization
called loop-to-memset,
and what that is,
is if you have initialization
types of arrays where you're
initializing things to zero,
the compiler actually will transform
that into what's called a memset.
And memset on each of our architectures,
including the GFly,
has been highly tuned in such a way that
you can't beat it with your own code.
And last, we talked about tuning for G5,
and tuning for G5 is really
important because it tells the
compiler this is a G5 architecture.
The compiler understands then how
to schedule instructions for the
maximum grouping so that we can keep
all of the functional units going
as much as possible in parallel.
So we're really extracting the power
of having a wide functional unit set.
Okay,
I mentioned standard conformance and so
I have a couple of relaxation rules here.
One of them is having to do with
an option called strict aliasing.
And aliasing is a situation where you
have two pointers and those pointers are
actually pointing to the same object.
So those objects are then aliased.
And the compiler often can't tell, well,
even if they're different data types,
if in fact the objects are aliased.
And so it has to make the
assumption that they are.
Well, you can help the compiler out by,
if you know in your program – and this
is one of your program knowledge items
– if you know that your pointers are
never aliased within your program,
you can tell the compiler,
use strict aliasing assumptions here.
And so in the example,
basically what this means is – and
this is a very simple example –
strict aliasing tells the compiler,
by the way, that if pointers are
a different data type,
they will not be aliased.
You can assume they're not aliased.
So in this particular case here,
without strict aliasing,
we would actually have to reload
the PI with a 1 before we return PI.
By saying strict aliasing,
we're able to understand that we
don't have to worry about reloading
that and in fact can be put into
a register and returned that way.
So this can have,
interestingly enough in many programs,
a pretty big impact.
The second that falls within the area
of conformance is our fast math option.
And fast math, you should understand,
is not IEEE conformant.
But, by the way, almost all code doesn't
require IEEE conformance.
And you know that if it does.
And so, by relaxing that rule,
we relax that back to where the compiler
can assume that the associative,
distributive,
and community principles hold.
And so it can actually rearrange
code in the fashion that I show
here on the screen to best utilize
the scheduling of math and the
computation of these operations.
This is another one that
can really win for you.
And if you really don't need to
understand whether on the boundary
conditions that it's not a number,
it is a number, or it's infinity,
then you should try using fast
math and try that in your program.
Hardware-specific then, of course,
we say mcpu = g5 and in the gcc compiler
that says you're perfectly free to use
any G5 instructions that are available.
And then inline floor happens to
make use of a couple of specialized
instructions in the G5 to actually
inline the floor intrinsic right in line.
The next three have to do with alignment.
And one of the things that we've
learned about the G5 is that
it's very sensitive to alignment.
And you can make dramatic improvements
in your code performance if you
try to deliver well-aligned types
of data and well-aligned code.
In this case, we're aligning loops,
jumps,
and functions all on 16-byte boundaries.
And yes, this does cause some
bloat in your program.
But our experience is that
the performance far outweighs
the bloat that you get and the
size increase in the program.
The last item there, malign-natural,
says, alright, align all data types on
their natural boundary.
So you have to be cognizant of that
if you're concerned about data being
packed together or things of that
nature because data types will then
be aligned with perhaps gaps in them.
I would just encourage you in moving
out of the Dash Fast part of this
that you should give that a try.
Feel free to give us feedback
in terms of problems you have.
One of the things that it can
help you trigger is the need for
going the next step of analysis.
If in fact you use Dash Fast and you
don't see speedup within your code,
then you should be thinking that, well,
maybe I've got some algorithmic problems
or some memory accessing problems
that are the real performance killers.
And so there's no way the compiler
is going to optimize you out of this.
You will have to go to Shark and
try and understand the problem.
So you have to be cognizant of that.
And try and understand the program
and what's causing that to happen.
The next thing I want to talk about
is feedback-directed optimization.
And feedback-directed optimization is
really an optimization that allows you to
tell the compiler in more detail exactly
how you expect your code to execute.
And the compiler will take that
knowledge into account and will
do a better job of optimizing.
It's used, number one, for inlining.
The concern about inlining – and it
was mentioned by Sanjay – is that,
boy, if you over-inline,
you can kill performance as well.
Well,
using feedback-directed optimization,
we actually tell the compiler
from results from a training run
exactly how many times that a
call site was a function called,
how many loops are in an iteration
that has a function in it,
and how many loops are in an iteration
that has a function inside of that loop.
And so you can make very good
decisions in terms of performance
versus size trade-offs,
as opposed to using guesses,
which are the normant –
The second thing it's used for is what
we call hot and cold partitioning.
And hot and cold partitioning
– the best example I would have
for that is an if statement.
You have two branches,
and one of those gets
executed predominantly,
and the other one is only occasionally,
maybe only in an error condition.
So we tag the hot one and we start
grouping the hot code together,
and we take the cold code
and we move that off together
at the end of the program.
And so we help to compact
the program down and keep the
footprint for that program so
that we reduce paging once again.
In operation, there are a couple of flags
that you use to do this.
So first you would use the create profile
flag and you would actually create an
executable that is instrumented such that
it can gather the profiling information.
You run that with a training set of data.
Then you rebuild your program,
optimizing it using the
profile that you just created.
Not all applications, I realize,
lend themselves to
this type of profiling.
Maybe it's an interactive
type of application.
But certainly if you have
computationally intensive applications
that work on large data sets,
taking advantage of trying
to train the application,
the compiler to optimize the application
for that is really a great thing to do.
Well worth the effort.
Then finally I want to talk
about AutoVectorization.
Just out of curiosity,
how many are using the
AltiVec processor today?
Okay, we have quite a few hearty souls.
But you also understand that
it doesn't come for free.
It takes work to program it today.
What we are doing is we're trying
to open up the vista of using the
AltiVec to a broader scope of folks.
And so areas where you may
not in fact want to spend the
effort tuning it yourself.
So what is AutoVectorization?
It's simply the compiler
being able to transform serial
loops into vectorizable loops.
So what is AutoVectorization?
And what are vectors?
For those who don't know that, well,
a vector is 128 bits.
It can be operated on in a number of
different sizes for integers and floating
point and bit operations and so forth.
All of those operations within that
128 bits actually occur in parallel,
and so therein lies the speedup.
Just a quick overview:
the types of operations are arithmetic,
logical, compare, rotate and shift.
They're all done within the vector unit.
And of course the data
types we just talked about.
So, in your DVD that you've received,
there is a preview compiler,
a preview of the 3.5 compiler.
And that is a first introduction
to you of the autovectorization.
It has limitations and our
goal is to really work on those
limitations between now and the
time it's released with Tiger.
But today, what can it handle?
It can handle loops with both
known and unknown bounds.
And there's different code that
we have to generate to discover
the loop iteration counts at
runtime if they're not known.
Loops with even and odd vector lengths.
Loops with conditional loops.
With conditionals in those,
particularly simple conditionals.
And misaligned vectors on loads.
So we're able to take unaligned vectors.
And what I mean by that is, once again,
AltaVec operates on a 16
byte boundary type of vector.
And so if your vectors aren't
aligned on 16 byte boundaries,
and you can get that from
malloc arrays and of course your
own arrays that you allocate.
But we go through vector
operations to align them.
And I'll show you a little bit
about the performance penalty
that can occur when you do that.
Auto-vectorization has difficulties
with pointers and aliasing.
Well,
I talked a little bit about that before
in the scalar part of the presentation.
That's true here as well.
In this particular example,
there is no way that the compiler,
unless A and B are globals, are local.
They're certainly not
local within this function.
And so unless they're globals,
there's no way the compiler can
discover that these are not aliased.
And so it'll have to make the
assumption they are in today's
world and not vectorize this loop.
However, you can help the compiler
out in a simple way.
You can actually use
the restrict keyword.
And the restrict tells the compiler,
"Okay, this pointer does not alias with
any other pointed-to object."
And so that's a simple help.
It turns the loop into one that
can be vectorized that can't today.
The next thing that it has difficulty
with that you need to watch out for
is that scalar loops may have data
dependencies that work perfectly fine
when you're dealing in the scalar mode.
But to try and transform that into
a vector type of operation where
you have a number of elements
being computed at the same time,
you can't have those dependencies.
And so the first illustration of a
loop here is one in which we simply
couldn't vectorize it because you
will have this data dependency.
And the second one – the
second one looks similar,
but in fact there's no data dependency
here because this is offset by n.
And then misaligned vector stores.
We simply can't handle
that in the preview.
We'll have that available
in the GM release,
but if you're going to
play with the 3.5 compiler,
be aware that the vector that
you're storing into needs to
be correctly aligned in memory.
So what is using the auto
vectorization all about?
Well, it's about performance.
And so I have some initial numbers here,
and these are already out of date
as we continue to tune the code.
But for simple types
of operations in loops,
you can see speedups here that
go all the way to 14 times.
And we're now seeing even around
20 times in some of our work.
If you have misaligned data,
the types of impacts that you
can see is you really reduce
the performance significantly.
Now this, as I said, I expect to improve.
We're in a very early stage
with the auto vectorization.
We have a limited set of loops that
we're able to recognize and vectorize,
and so I would encourage
you to take a look at this.
We are really open to you sending us
kernels of code of things that we don't
seem to be able to vectorize because we
want to build up and mature that ability.
And this will be something
that we're working on.
As you can see, though,
the reason we're excited is because
this can really offer some speedups.
And particularly if you haven't
already been using the auto
vector processor on your system,
it's sitting there just wasting away,
and you can get some real
performance out of it.
So the operation here includes the
enabling of a couple of options.
I believe that in Xcode today
there's actually an option for auto
vectorization that will do that
for you and enable the process.
So if you're looking
for more information,
you can contact Mark Tozer
or Matthew Formica.
And Mark, do you want to come up?
So to add to that, the reference library,
some documentation that's on
Apple's developer website,
some tech notes that are written that
were posted since last developers
conference with a lot of information.
We'll have George Warner up here
in a few seconds with the Q&A who
participated in writing some of
that technical documentation.
A couple of takeaways I want to make
sure you go away with this morning.
You know, it's been a year since we
introduced the PowerPC chip,
as I said earlier.
So you should be looking at
transitioning your code to the G5.
You should be looking at
optimizing the code and making
sure that it performs at its best.
Optimization is a skill.
It is not something that comes for free.
Although the tools that you heard
about today in the compilers in both
Apple's compilers as well as IBM's
will provide a lot of assistance.
But there is sometimes when you
need to get in there and roll up
your sleeves and do the hard work.
For that,
we have optimization workshops at Apple.
For the past year,
we've had over eight workshops,
one a month essentially,
helping developers like
yourselves to work through the
problems of optimizing your code.
So I encourage you to
participate in those workshops.
They're posted through the
Apple developer connection emails.
And they'll be continuing on
throughout the rest of the year.
I'll have the next one
starting in August.
I believe the first or
second week of August,
if I can remember correctly.
And then we have the next one.
The other thing is that it does take
a lot of work to do optimization work,
but there are a lot of rewards to it,
as Sanjay pointed out in
some of the sample code.
We're here to help you
through those problems.
So, as Steve mentioned, from IBM,
there is the optimization
lab here all week.
Please take advantage of those resources.
We're here and committed to
helping you guys write the
best code for this platform.
We feel that the G5 has a lot to offer.
It has a lot of headroom to grow.
The best applications on the platform
are those that take advantage of all the
abilities that the hardware has to offer.
So please, again,
make sure that that's something
in mind when you're looking
at revving your application,
writing a new application,
or just taking the time to take
a look at what you've done in the
past and maybe improve upon that.